A variable is any factor, trait, or condition that can exist in differing amounts or types. An experiment, usually have four kinds of variables: 
controllable factors, denoted as Factors (a.k.a. controlled independent variables, and Independent-Active variables). Are variables whose value is controlled and systematically varied by the researchers in the context of the experiment.
non-controllable factors, denoted as NCFactors (a.k.a  uncontrollable independent variables, and independent-attributive variables). Those are variables whose value can change between observations but cannot be changed in the context of the experiment by the researchers. For instance, the sex, age or weight of the humans participating as experimental objects. You cannot change the value of such variables at will, but its value will change among the objects of the experiment.
extraneous variables, denoted as Extraneous (a.k.a. Nuisances).  Those are variables that either you consider as noising factors that could introduce bias in the experiment results, or are irrelevant for the experiment but you want to track them and record its value for taking it into account in future research.
outcomes, denoted as Outcomes (a.k.a dependent variables). Are variables that constitute the results of the experiment, on which the hypothesis and goal of the experiment are formulated. For instance, if we perform an experiment to test an antipyretic drug, the outcome variable would be the decrease in  temperature of patient’s body after 2 hours of treatment application.
In SEDL, variables are defined by an identifier, a type and a domain. the default simple types are integer, real (float), boolean and enumerates (enum) that can be in turn ordered or not.  In SEDL an experimental variable always has domain defined as a set of levels, that are the values that the variable could possibly have in the context of the experiment. The set of levels of an experimental variable can be described by extension (i.e. by enumerating each possible value that the variable can take), or by intension (i.e. defining a set of constraints that determine the set of values, e.g. its maximum and minimum value). Moreover, in SEDL an experimental variable has always a name (that must be unique in the experiment), a kind that can be Nominal (e.g. X,Y,Z), Ordinal (e.g. horrible, bad, fair, good), and Scalar (e.g. 1.1, 3, 5, 2.7), and a role. The role of a variable can be: Factor; NCFactor; Outcome and Extraneous. Additionally, experimental variables can have an unit in which such variable is measured (its specification is optional).
